Resident Evil 3: Nemesis – Jill’s Last Escape

The Fall of Raccoon City
Lore Segment: Raccoon City, September 1998, was a Midwestern industrial hub of 100,000, its skyline a deceptive blend of Umbrella’s gleaming corporate towers and decaying tenements. The city thrived on Umbrella’s pharmaceutical empire, its hospitals, schools, and police department fattened by their grants. But beneath the surface, Umbrella’s labs churned out horrors: the T-virus, a bioweapon that rewrote life into grotesque parody, had escaped their facilities. First detected in the Arklay Mountains’ Spencer Mansion in July 1998, the virus now seeped into Raccoon City’s water supply, sewers, and streets, turning neighbors into shambling corpses. The RPD, corrupt and underfunded, was powerless against the outbreak. Umbrella’s private army, the Umbrella Biohazard Countermeasure Service (UBCS), deployed under the guise of rescue, but their true mission was containment—silencing witnesses and erasing evidence. By September 28, Uptown’s dive bars, Downtown’s clock tower, and the RPD’s gothic halls were battlegrounds, the city’s pulse fading under the weight of infection and betrayal. A U.S. missile strike loomed, set to obliterate Raccoon City and Umbrella’s sins by October 1. In this dying city, one woman stood against the tide: Jill Valentine, a S.T.A.R.S. survivor, hunted by Umbrella’s deadliest creation.

Chapter 1: The Last Stand in Uptown
Setting: Jill’s Apartment, Uptown Raccoon City
Jill Valentine’s apartment was a third-floor walk-up in Uptown, a crumbling corner of Raccoon City where neon signs buzzed like dying flies. The walls, yellowed by decades of cigarette smoke, were a war room of desperation: newspaper clippings, grainy photos of Umbrella’s facilities, and maps pinned with red string formed a chaotic investigation board above her desk, a spiderweb of truth she was close to unraveling. A sagging twin bed, draped in a faded quilt from her mother, sat against one wall, its pillow dented from restless sleep. A chipped mug of cold coffee—cheap, acrid, bought in bulk—rested beside a dog-eared copy of The Stand, its pages warped from late-night reading. An open pizza box from Joe’s Pizzeria, Uptown’s greasy staple, lay on the counter, a single slice and a scattering of crusts all that remained of her last indulgence. A small TV, its screen flecked with dust, hummed in the corner, casting a flickering glow across the room. Her S.T.A.R.S. badge was buried in a desk drawer, a bitter relic of her suspension, next to a Beretta 92FS, cleaned and loaded, always within reach. A cracked mirror hung above a chipped sink, reflecting a face hardened by trauma but softened by fleeting vulnerability. The air carried the damp musk of old plaster, the tang of gun oil, and the faint grease of pizza, undercut by the steady drizzle of September rain seeping through a cracked window, where Uptown’s neon-lit alley pulsed faintly below.
Jill hadn’t slept properly in weeks, her nights plagued by nightmares of the Spencer Mansion. Two months ago, July 1998, she and her S.T.A.R.S. Alpha Team had walked into a trap in the Arklay Mountains. The mansion was a labyrinth of death—zombies, mutated dogs, a Tyrant unleashed by their captain, Wesker, a traitor in Umbrella’s pocket. She saw Richard’s throat torn out, Kenneth’s body slumped in blood, Forest’s eyes pecked out by crows. Each night, she’d wake gasping, her tank top soaked, the Beretta in her hand before she registered the dim safety of her apartment. The dreams were warnings, her subconscious screaming that Umbrella’s shadow was growing, and she was running out of time.

S.T.A.R.S. was her calling, her anchor. Raised in a military family, Jill learned discipline early—her father, a former Army man, taught her to shoot, pick locks, and survive. She joined the RPD’s Special Tactics and Rescue Service in 1996, drawn to its elite status, its promise of protecting Raccoon City with precision and honor. At 23, she was one of the youngest on Alpha Team, her skills in bomb disposal and reconnaissance earning her a place alongside Chris Redfield and Barry Burton. S.T.A.R.S. was more than a job; it was a family, a shield against a world she’d seen break too many times. The mansion shattered that illusion. Wesker’s betrayal, Irons’s corruption, and Umbrella’s grip on the city showed her how fragile that shield was. Yet, it fueled her drive—she wasn’t just a cop; she was a survivor, a fighter who’d seen the truth and refused to look away.

Her suspension was a wound that wouldn’t heal. After the mansion, Jill, Chris, Barry, and Rebecca had filed reports, desperate to expose Umbrella’s bioweapons. They’d presented evidence—lab logs, photos, survivor accounts—to Chief Irons and the RPD brass. But Irons, a leering predator with Umbrella’s money in his pockets, dismissed them as delusional. “You’re seeing conspiracies where there’s only tragedy,” he’d sneered, his office reeking of cologne and taxidermy chemicals. The press, bought or scared, ignored them. The RPD suspended her on vague charges of “conduct unbecoming,” but Jill knew the truth: Umbrella wanted her silenced. The suspension was a warning, a signal she was a loose end. She couldn’t trust the RPD—not Irons, not the officers who whispered about her “crazy stories.” Even Brad Vickers, the only S.T.A.R.S. member left in the city, was a coward, too skittish to help. She’d considered calling him, but what could he fix? He’d fled the mansion at the first sign of trouble. Trust was a ghost, and Jill was alone.

In the two days before Raccoon City’s fall, September 26–27, Jill had barricaded herself in her apartment, cut off from the world, her mind a storm of obsession and dread. She was close—dangerously close—to unraveling Umbrella’s web. Her investigation board was her battlefield: clippings about “flu-like symptoms” in Uptown, stolen memos hinting at a lab called NEST beneath the hospital, and rumors of a bioweapon codenamed “Nemesis.” Her spiral notebook was filled with sharp, precise handwriting—dates, names, shipment logs tracing Umbrella’s funding to Irons, the mayor, the water treatment plant. She was piecing together a truth that chilled her: Umbrella wasn’t just negligent; they were testing the T-virus on Raccoon City, a live experiment. Her suspension meant they feared her, saw her as a threat who’d gotten too close. The subtext was paralyzing—she was alone, a target, with no one to trust but herself.

Her days were a blur of mundane rituals anchoring her to sanity. She’d brew cheap coffee, its bitterness a grim comfort, and sip it cold while scribbling notes. She’d clean her Beretta, the click of the slide a mantra against panic. The pizza from Joe’s, ordered two nights ago, was her lifeline—she’d eat it slice by slice, the cheese congealing, the crusts piling up as she worked. On September 26, she’d put on Aliens—Ripley’s fight against the xenomorphs a mirror to her own—sinking into her couch in a faded tank top and gym shorts, her S.T.A.R.S. uniform abandoned in a closet. She stared at the screen like a zombie, her mind churning with Umbrella’s secrets, barely registering Ripley’s defiance. The cozy hum of the TV and the rain’s tap on the window wrapped her in a fragile bubble, but anxiety gnawed at the edges. She’d pause to look in the mirror, her reflection showing a woman hardened by trauma—dark circles under her eyes, jaw set, but a flicker of doubt in her gaze. Am I enough for this fight? The thought lingered, her vulnerability raw, but she’d push it down, returning to her notes, her pen digging into the paper.

On September 27, cracks appeared in her isolation. The radio, always on low, reported “gang violence” and “curfews,” lies that broke her focus. She’d switch to the TV, catching news clips of riots in Downtown, police barricades failing. Her pulse quickened—Umbrella’s cover was fraying. She ate another pizza slice, the crust stale, her chewing mechanical as she stared at her investigation board. They’re losing control. The thought was both thrilling and terrifying. Power surges flickered the lights, the TV cutting to static before resuming. She’d pace, her gym shorts swishing, her tank top clinging to her skin in the humid apartment. She considered calling Brad, her only S.T.A.R.S. contact, but dismissed it—his cowardice would only drag her down. I’m on my own. The realization settled like a stone, her mind a flurry of guilt, anger, and resolve.

By September 28, the city’s pulse was erratic. Jill woke on her couch, the TV blaring static, Aliens long over. The power surged again, lights flickering, then died, plunging the apartment into gloom. The radio caught fragments: “—Uptown barricades breached…” Her heart raced. She moved to the window, the rain heavier now, neon lights fractured in the downpour. Rumbles shook the building—explosions, distant but closing in. Screams pierced the air, human at first, then guttural, wrong. She grabbed the last pizza crust, chewing absently as she checked her Beretta, her hands steady despite the chaos in her head. The news, before the power cut, showed fires in Downtown, police retreating. The rumbles grew louder, the air thick with smoke seeping through the window. Her building groaned, flames licking the alley below—Jack’s Bar, a block away, was ablaze. Moans echoed from the hallway, her infected neighbors clawing at doors. The chaos was boxing her in, her cozy sanctuary now a trap.
The tipping point came at dusk on September 28. Jill was at her desk, the last crust gone, her notebook open to a page titled “NEST.” A voicemail from an RPD officer, Daniels, played on loop: “Jill, it’s spreading… stay inside…” She flipped the radio to the RPD frequency, catching: “—barricades failing… Uptown’s gone…” The city screamed. She yanked the curtain aside, rain lashing the glass. Flames roared from Jack’s Bar, the firelight dancing in blood-tinged puddles. Alarms wailed, discordant, like a dying animal. Screams rose—human, desperate, then silenced by tearing sounds. An explosion rocked the Uptown Theater, its marquee collapsing in sparks. Zombies staggered through the streets, their rotting faces caught in flickering streetlights. The T-virus had won. Raccoon City was burning.

Jill’s S.T.A.R.S. training snapped into focus. This is it. Umbrella’s mess, my fight. She grabbed her gear: Beretta, knife, lockpick, flashlight, a backpack with ammo and a first-aid spray. Her tank top and gym shorts were swapped for cargo pants and a fresh top, her movements swift but heavy with stress. I’m alone. Brad’s out there, but he’s no help. The flames were at her building now, smoke curling under the door, the moans in the hallway louder. Her apartment, her last bastion, was a death trap. The subtext was defiance laced with fear—she’d survived the mansion, and she’d survive this, but the cost was hers alone. She kicked the door open, the wood splintering, and plunged into the burning city.

